स्निग्धां मुग्धां सततमपि तां लालयन् सत्यभामां
यातो भूय: सह खलु तया याज्ञसेनीविवाहम् ।
पार्थप्रीत्यै पुनरपि मनागास्थितो हस्तिपुर्यां
सशक्रप्रस्थं पुरमपि विभो संविधायागतोऽभू: ॥१॥
स्निग्धां मुग्धां	loving and very beautiful
स्ततम्-अपि	for some time also
तां लालयन्	her endearing
सत्यभामां	Satyabhaamaa
यात: भूय:	(Thou) went, thereafter
सह खलु तया	with indeed her
याज्ञसेनी-विवाहम्	to Paanchaali's marriage
पार्थ-प्रीत्यै	for the Pandavaa's pleasure
पुन:-अपि	again also
मनाक्-आस्थित:	for sometime stayed
हस्तिपुर्याम्	in Hastinaapur
शक्रप्रस्थम् पुरम्-अपि	Indraprastha city also
विभो संविधाय-	O Lord! Founding
आगत:-अभू:	returned
Thou always endeared the loving and very beautiful Satyabhaamaa. Thereafter Thou went with her to attend the wedding of Paanchaali. To please the Paandavaas, Thou stayed in Hastinaapur for sometime. O Lord! Thou then founded the city of Indraprastha and then returned to Dwaarikaa.
भद्रां भद्रां भवदवरजां कौरवेणार्थ्यमानां
त्वद्वाचा तामहृत कुहनामस्करी शक्रसूनु: ।
तत्र क्रुद्धं बलमनुनयन् प्रत्यगास्तेन सार्धं
शक्रप्रस्थं प्रियसखमुदे सत्यभामासहाय: ॥२॥
भद्रां भद्रां	the virtuous Subhadraa
भवत्-अवरजां	Thy younger sister
कौरवेण-अर्थ्यमानाम्	by the Kaurava (Duryodhana) sought (in marriage)
त्वत्-वाचा	by Thy words
ताम्-अहृत	her carried away
कुहना-मस्करी	as a false sanyaasi
शक्रसूनु:	Indra's son Arjun
तत्र क्रुद्धम् बलम्-	there, enraged Balaraama
अनुनयन् प्रत्यगा:-	pacifying (Thou) went
तेन सार्धम्	with him
शक्रप्रस्थम्	to Indraprastha
प्रिय-सख-मुदे	for dear friend's pleasure
सत्यभामा-सहाय:	along with Satyabhaamaa
Thy younger sister, the virtuous Subhadraa was sought in marriage by the Kuru prince Duryodhana. She was carried away by Indra's son Arjuna in the guise of an ascetic at Thy behest. Balaraama was enraged at this but was later pacified by Thee. Thou then went with him and Satyabhaamaa to Indraprastha to the great delight of Thy dear friend Arjuna.
तत्र क्रीडन्नपि च यमुनाकूलदृष्टां गृहीत्वा
तां कालिन्दीं नगरमगम: खाण्डवप्रीणिताग्नि: ।
भ्रातृत्रस्तां प्रणयविवशां देव पैतृष्वसेयीं
राज्ञां मध्ये सपदि जहृषे मित्रविन्दामवन्तीम् ॥३॥
तत्र क्रीडन्-अपि च	there sporting even and
यमुना-कूल-दृष्टां	on Yamuna's bank seen
गृहीत्वा तां कालिन्दीम्	taking that Kaalindi
नगरम्-अगम:	to the city (Thou) went
खाण्डव-प्रीणित-अग्नि:	by the khandava forest pleasing the fire god
भ्रातृ-त्रस्ताम्	of her brother afraid
प्रणय-विवशाम्	in love (for Thee) helpless
देव पैतृष्वसेयीं	O Lord! Thy father's sisters's daughter
राज्ञां मध्ये	from among the kings
सपदि जहृषे	quickly took away
मित्रविन्दाम्-अवन्तीम्	Mitravindaa, the princess of Avanti
Even as Thou sported there, Thou saw Kaalindi on the banks of the river Yamuna and took her as Thy wife. Thou pleased the god of fire, Agni by letting him consume the Khaandava forest, and then returned to the city of Dwaarika. The princess of Avanti, Mitravindaa was the daughter of Thy father's sister and was greatly in love with Thee. She was afraid of her brother and was helpless. Thou took her away suddenly in the presence of many kings.
सत्यां गत्वा पुनरुदवहो नग्नजिन्नन्दनां तां
बध्वा सप्तापि च वृषवरान् सप्तमूर्तिर्निमेषात् ।
भद्रां नाम प्रददुरथ ते देव सन्तर्दनाद्या-
स्तत्सोदर्या वरद भवत: साऽपि पैतृष्वसेयी ॥४॥
सत्यां गत्वा	Satya, going to
पुन:-उदवह:	again Thou married (Satya)
नग्नजित्-नन्दनां तां	Nagnajit's daughter her
बध्वा सप्त-अपि	harnessing seven even
च वृष-वरान्	and bull's powerful
सप्त-मूर्ति:-निमेषात्	by seven forms assuming
भद्रां नाम	Bhadraa by name
प्रददु:-अथ	gave then
ते देव	to Thee O Lord!
सन्तर्दन-आद्या:-	by Santardana and other
तत्-सोद्र्या:	of her brothers
वरद भवत:	O Bestower of Boons! To Thee
सा-अपि पैतृष्वसेयी	she also was Thy father's sister's daughter
Thou then went to Kausala and married the king Nagnajit's daughter after demonstrating Thy strength by harnessing seven powerful bulls simultaneously assuming seven forms. O Lord! Bhadraa's brothers Santardana and others gave her to Thee in marriage. O Bestower of Boons! she was also the daughter of Thy father's sister.
पार्थाद्यैरप्यकृतलवनं तोयमात्राभिलक्ष्यं
लक्षं छित्वा शफरमवृथा लक्ष्मणां मद्रकन्याम् ।
अष्टावेवं तव समभवन् वल्लभास्तत्र मध्ये
शुश्रोथ त्वं सुरपतिगिरा भौमदुश्चेष्टितानि ॥५॥
पार्थ-आद्यै:-अपि	by Arjuna and others also
अकृत-लवनं	not pierced through
तोय-मात्र-अभिलक्ष्यं	in water alone reflected
लक्षं छित्वा	the target, piercing
शफरम्-अवृथा	of a fish, married
लक्ष्मणां मन्द्रकन्याम्	Lakshmanaa, the daughter of the king of Madra
अष्टौ-एवम्	eight, in this manner
तव समभवन्	Thy became
वल्लभा:-तत्र	wives, there also
मध्ये शुश्रुथ	between all this, (Thou) heard
त्वं सुरपति-गिरा	Thou by Indra's words
भौम-दुष्टचेष्टितानि	Bhauma's evil deeds
The target which was just a reflection of a fish in the water was not hit at even by Arjuna and the others. Striking which Thou married Lakshmanaa who was the daughter of the king of Madra. In this manner Thou had eight wives. Thou then came to know about the misdeeds of Bhauma from Indra's words.
स्मृतायातं पक्षिप्रवरमधिरूढस्त्वमगमो
वहन्नङ्के भामामुपवनमिवारातिभवनम् ।
विभिन्दन् दुर्गाणि त्रुटितपृतनाशोणितरसै:
पुरं तावत् प्राग्ज्योतिषमकुरुथा: शोणितपुरम् ॥६॥
स्मृत-आयातं	(as and when) remembered, coming
पक्षिप्रवरम्-	the divine bird (Garuda)
अधिरूढ:-त्वम्-अगम:	riding on him Thou went
वहन्-अङ्के	carrying on Thy lap
भामाम्-उपवनम्-इव-	Satyabhaamaa, in a garden as if
अराति-भवनम्	in the enemy's residence
विभिन्दन् दुर्गाणि	destroying its fortification
त्रुटित-पृतना-	slaughtering the army
शोणित-रसै:	(with its) blood liquid
पुरं तावत्	that city then
प्राग्ज्योतिषम्-	Praagjyotisha
अकुरुथा:	made into
शोणितपुरम्	Shonitpura
Thou rode with Satyabhaamaa on Thy lap riding the divine bird Garuda, who came to Thee as and when required and remembered. Thou went to the residence of the enemy as if Thou were going to a garden. After destroying the fortification of the city of Praagjyotish, Thou killed the army and made the blood run all over the city. Thou soon converted the city of Praagjyotish into Shonitpura (the city of blood).
मुरस्त्वां पञ्चास्यो जलधिवनमध्यादुदपतत्
स चक्रे चक्रेण प्रदलितशिरा मङ्क्षु भवता ।
चतुर्दन्तैर्दन्तावलपतिभिरिन्धानसमरं
रथाङ्गेन छित्वा नरकमकरोस्तीर्णनरकम् ॥७॥
मुर:-त्वां	(the Asura) Mura (to) Thee
पञ्च-आस्य:	the five faced one
जलधि-वन-मध्यात्-	from the middle of the ocean like forest
उदपतत्	rushed
स चक्रे चक्रेण	he was made by the discus
प्रदलित-शिरा	cut off heads
मङ्क्षु भवता	at once by Thee
चतु:-दन्तै:-	by the four tusked
दन्तावलपतिभि:-	mighty elephants
इन्धान-समरं	giving tough and protracted fight
रथाङ्गेन छित्वा	with Thy discus severing
नरकम्-अकरो:-	to Narakaasur made
तीर्ण-नरकम्	pass over hell
The Asura Mura having five faces rushed towards Thee from the middle of the forest which was like an ocean. He was at once made headless by Thy discus cutting off his five heads. Then Narakaasura with his regiment of mighty four tusked elephants gave a prolonged tough fight. Thou cut off his head also and made him pass over hell (and saved him from the suffering of hell).
स्तुतो भूम्या राज्यं सपदि भगदत्तेऽस्य तनये
गजञ्चैकं दत्वा प्रजिघयिथ नागान्निजपुरीम् ।
खलेनाबद्धानां स्वगतमनसां षोडश पुन:
सहस्राणि स्त्रीणामपि च धनराशिं च विपुलं ॥८॥
स्तुत: भूम्या	hymns sung (to Thee) by Bhoomi Devi
राज्यं सपदि	the kingdom at once
भगदत्ते-अस्य तनये	to Bhagadatta his son
गजम्-च-एकं	and elephant one
दत्वा प्रजघयिथ	gave and sent away
नागान्-निज-पुरीम्	the elephants to Thy city
खलेन-आबद्धानाम्	by the wicked (Narakaasura) imprisoned
स्वगत-मनसां	whose minds were devoted to Thee
षोडश पुन: सहस्राणि	sixteen again thousand (16000)
स्त्रीणाम्-अपि च	women also and
धन-राशिं च विपुलं	wealth of great amount
Bhumi Devi sang hymns in Thy praise. Thou at once gave the kingdom and an elephant to Narakaasur's son Bhagadatta. The rest of the elephants Thou sent away to Dwaarikaa along with a good amount of wealth. Thou also sent the 16000 women who nourished love for Thee, and were imprisoned by the wicked Narakaasura.
भौमापाहृतकुण्डलं तददितेर्दातुं प्रयातो दिवं
शक्राद्यैर्महित: समं दयितया द्युस्त्रीषु दत्तह्रिया ।
हृत्वा कल्पतरुं रुषाभिपतितं जित्वेन्द्रमभ्यागम-
स्तत्तु श्रीमददोष ईदृश इति व्याख्यातुमेवाकृथा: ॥९॥
भौम-अपाहृत-कुण्डलं	by Bhauma taken away the earrings
तत्-अदिते:-दातुं	that to Aditi to give
प्रयात: दिवम्	went to the heaven
शक्र-आद्यै:-महित:	by Indra and others honoured
समं दयितया	with (Thy) wife
द्यु-स्त्रीषु	the women of the heaven
द्त्त-ह्रिया	putting to shame
हृत्वा कल्पतरुम्	taking away the Kalpataru
रुषा-अभिपतितं	in anger having attacked
जित्वा-इन्द्रम्-	winning over Indra
अभ्यागम:-	returned
तत्-तु श्री-मद-दोष	that indeed is prosperity caused arrogance
ईदृश इति	comes to this
व्याख्यातुम्-एव-अकृथा:	demonstrate only (Thou) did
To give back to Aditi the ear ornaments which were taken away by Narakaasura, Thou went to the heaven. Satyabhaamaa had accompanied Thee who put to shame the women there, with her beauty. Thou were received with honour by Indra and others. Thou took away the Kalpataru, at which, the angered Indra put up a fight. Thou won over him and returned to Thy city. Thou did this to demonstrate to the world the evil which is generated from prosperity.
कल्पद्रुं सत्यभामाभवनभुवि सृजन् द्व्यष्टसाहस्रयोषा:
स्वीकृत्य प्रत्यगारं विहितबहुवपुर्लालयन् केलिभेदै: ।
आश्चर्यान्नारदालोकितविविधगतिस्तत्र तत्रापि गेहे
भूय: सर्वासु कुर्वन् दश दश तनयान् पाहि वातालयेश ॥१०॥
कल्पद्रुं	the Kalpa tree
सत्यभामा-भवन-भुवि	in Satyabhaamaa's palace courtyard
सृजन्	planting
द्व्य-अष्ट-साहस्र-	twice eight thousand
योषा: स्वीकृत्य	women accepting
प्रति-आगारं	in every house
विहित-बहु-वपु:-	taking on many forms
लालयन् केलिभेदै:	nurturing with various activities
आश्चर्यात्-नारद-	surprisingly by Naarada
आलोकित-विविध-गति:-	seen (in) different activities engaged
तत्र तत्र-अपि गेहे	in each of those houses
भूय: सर्वासु कुर्वन्	again to all of them giving
द्श दश तनयान्	ten sons each
पाहि वातालयेश	save O Lord of Guruvaayur!
Thou planted the Kalpa tree in the courtyard of Satyabhaamaa's palace. The 16000 women were accepted by Thee as wives. Thou took on as many forms and engaged Thyself in each of those houses of these wives in various activities and lovingly nurtured them. Naarada was surprised to see Thee sporting in this manner. Thou then gave each of them ten sons. O Lord of Guruvaayur save me.